=pod

=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

B<jmc> - JSON Model Compiler

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 jmc [-h] [--version] [--debug] [--verbose] [--quiet] [--doc {pod,syn,help,man}] [--man]
     [--maps MAPS] [--auto] [--entry ENTRY] [--regex-engine {re,re2,pcre2}]
     [--allow-duplicates] [-[-no]-extend] [--loose-int] [--strict-int] [--loose-float]
     [--strict-float] [--loose-number] [--strict-number] [--loose] [--check]
     [-[-no]-single-line-regex] [-[-no]-optimize] [-[-no]-reporting] [-[-no]-inline]
     [--format {json,yaml,py,c,js,plpgsql,pl,java}] [-[-no]-sort] [--indent INDENT]
     [--gen {exec,module,code,none} | --executable | --module | --code | --no-gen]
     [--cc CC] [--cflags CFLAGS] [--cppflags CPPFLAGS] [--ldflags LDFLAGS] [-[-no]-precompiled]
     [--include [INCLUDE ...]] [--library [LIBRARY ...]] [--define [DEFINE ...]]
     [--javac JAVAC] [--jflags JFLAGS] [-[-no]-schema-version] [--short-version]
     [--name NAME] [-[-no]-report] [--none] [--true] [--false] [--test-vector]
     [--map-threshold THRESHOLD] [--map-share] [-[-no]-strcmp-optimize] [--byte-order (le|be)]
     [--max-strcmp-cset SIZE] [-[-no]-unique-optimize] [-[-no]-regex-optimize]
     [--may-must-open-threshold THRESHOLD] [--must-only-threshold THRESHOLD]
     [--partition-threshold THRESHOLD] [--or-must-prop THRESHOLD] [--array-unrolling-size=SIZE]
     [-[-no]-sort-must] [-[-no]-sort-may] [-[-no]-predef] [--no-opt OPTIM]
     [--op {P,U,J,N,E,C} | --preproc | --dump | --jdump | --nope | --export | --compile]
     [--output OUTPUT] (--model MODEL | MODEL) [VALUES ...]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

The JSON Model Compiler command processes a L<JSON Model|https://json-model.org/> to
generate modules or scripts in C, JS, Python, PL/pgSQL, Perl, or a more-or-less equivalent
JSON Schema or pydantic type declarations.

=head1 ARGUMENTS

=over 4

=item B<model>

Model to process, a local file or a URL.

=item B<values...>

List of  value files to check.

=back

=head1 OPTIONS

Here are the most useful options:

=head2 Metadata

=over 4

=item B<--help>/B<-h>

Show auto-generated synopsis and exit.

=item B<--version>

Show command version and exit.

=item B<--doc {pod,syn,help,man}>

Show help in some format and exit.

=item B<--man>

Show man page and exit.

=back

=head2 Verbosity

=over 4

=item B<--verbose>/B<-v>

Set verbose mode.

=item B<--quiet>

Set quiet mode, only show warnings.

=item B<--debug>

Set debug mode, which is very verbose.

=back

=head2 Input

=over 4

=item B<--model MODEL">

Provide the mode with an option instead of a parameter.

=item B<--maps "URL PATH">/B<-m …>

Map remote urls to a local path.

=item B<--auto>/B<-a>

Infer url to path mapping from declared model URL (C<.$."">).

=item B<--check>

Whether to check the model for errors at various stages.

=item B<--allow-duplicates>

Accept JSON with objects containing duplicated properties.

=item B<--extend>

Allow some extensions to help with JSU back-end implementation.

=back

=head2 Processing

=over 4

=item B<--op {P,E,C,U,J,N}>

Operation to run (preprocessing, export, compile, dump, jdump, none).

=item B<--{loose,strict}-{int,float,number}> B<--loose>

Whether to assume loose JSON numbers, i.e. accept I<42.0> as an integer or I<42> as a float.
Default is strict, but JS, PL/pgSQL and Perl backends are always loose due to the language
and type capabilities.

=item B<--re RELIB>

Regular expression library to use, default is to use B<re2> when available,
else the internal library.

=item B<--optimize>/B<-O>

Whether to optimize the model (partial eval, constraint simplifications, flattening,
or-inlining, dead code elimination, xor to or conversion…).

=item B<--no-opt> OPTIM

Whether to disable specific preprocessing optimizations:
C<srx>, C<csp>, C<sim>, C<flt>, C<pev>, C<ans>, C<aco>, C<x2o>, C<non>.

=back

=head2 Output

=over 4

=item B<--output FILE>/B<-o FILE>

Output file, the suffix of which is used for setting the default format and generation.

=item B<--format FMT>/B<-F FMT>

Output language, to override defaults.

=item B<--gen GEN>

Whether to generate an B<exec>utable, a B<module>, source B<code> or nothing B<none>,
to overide defaults.

=item B<--entry ENTRY>

Name of the entry function to generate.

=item B<--package PKG>

Name of package for generated module, if appliable.

=item B<--map-threshold THRESHOLD>

Maximum number of props to inline property checks in objects.

=item B<--map-share>

Whether to share common maps, may result in smaller generated code.

=item B<--may-must-open-threshold THRESHOLD>

Consider mmo object property scheme if the number of optional properties
is below the provided threshold, default is depends on target.

=item B<--must-only-threshold THRESHOLD>

Consider must-only object property scheme if the number of mandatory
properties is below the provided threshold, default depends on target.

=item B<--partition-threshold THRESHOLD>

Number of properties to trigger partitioning inlined property checks,
default depends on target, 0 means no partitioning.

=item B<--or-must-prop THRESHOLD>

Shortcut or-list based on full or partial discriminating mandatory properties
if length above threshold, default depends on target, 0 to disable.

=item B<--sort-must> B<--no-sort-must> B<--sort-may> B<--no-sort-may>

Whether to sort must or may properties when checks are unrolled,
default is to preserve the initial order within each category.

=item B<--predef> vs B<--no-predef>

Whether to check value contents wrt predef declarations.

=item B<--single-line-regex> vs B<--no-single-line-regex>

Whether to assume that regex are implicitely single line (C<s> option).

=item B<--array-unrolling-size SIZE>

Maximum size of simple array unrolling.

=back

=head2 C Compilation

=over 4

=item B<--cc COMPILER>

Compiler to use, defaut is C<cc>.

=item B<--{cpp,c,ld}flags ...>

Set raw C<cpp>, C<cc> or C<ld> flags.

=item B<-I DIR> B<-D VAR=VAL>

Add C<cpp> include path and definitions.

=item B<-L DIR>

Add to C<ld> link path.

=item B<--static>

Generate a statically linked executable.

=item B<--inline> B<--no-inline>

Generate inline hints.

=item B<--strcmp-optimize> B<--no-strcmp-optimize>

Whether to optimize string comparisons in some cases.

=item B<--max-strcmp-cset SIZE>

Maximum size for string constant set expansion.

=item B<--byte-order ORDER>

Set byte order for string comparison, either C<le> (little endian) or C<be> (big endian).

=item B<--regex-optimize> B<--no-regex-optimize>

Whether to optimize regex when possible.

=item B<--unique-optimize> B<--no-unique-optimize>

Whether to use type-specific uniticy check runtime functions.

=item B<--precompiled> B<--no-precompiled>

Whether to use precompiled runtime.
Beware that the precompiled runtime depends either on C<re2> or C<pcre2>,
so the regex engine cannot be changed.

=back

=head2 Java Compilation

=over 4

=item B<--javac JAVAC>

Java compiler.

=item B<--jflags JFLAGS>

Java compiler flags.

=back

=head2 JSON Schema Export

=over 4

=item B<-[-no]-schema-version>

Whether to force include/not include JSON Schema version.

=back

=head2 Testing

When testing values:

=over 4

=item B<--name NAME>/B<-n NAME>

Name of model to use, default is empty string for the root model.

=item B<--test-vector>

Assume a test vector input format for tested values.

=item B<--none>/B<--true>/B<--false>

Expected result of test values, return an error status if unexpected values are encountered.

=item B<--report>

Generate a report about why a value failed. Default is just to say PASS or FAIL.

=back

Note that environment variable C<JMC_OPTS> is also processed for preliminary options.

=head1 OPERATIONS

This section describes the main operations implemented by the compiler:

=head2 Preprocessing

The optimized proprocessed JSON Model is shown with C<-P -o preprocessed.json>.

=head2 Compilation

The compiler can generate code to actualy validate JSON data as:

=over 4

=item B<native>

C source (C<-o model.c>), object file (C<-o model.o>) or compiled executable (C<-o model.out>);

=item B<byte-code>

Java source (C<-o model.java>) or compiled class (C<-o model.class>);

=item B<scripts>

Python (C<-o model.py>), JavaScript (C<-o model.js>) or Perl (C<-o model.pl>);

=item B<modules>

Python (C<-o model.py --module>), JavaScript (C<-o model.mjs>), Perl (C<-o model.pm>),
PL/pgSQL (C<-o model.sql>), Java (C<-o model.java>) ready to be imported and used
in the corresponding language.

=back

=head2 Export

The compiler can export models to other data type declaration formats:

=over 4

=item B<JSON Schema>

Formatted in JSON (C<-E -o schema.json>) or yaml (C<-E -o schema.yaml>).

=item B<Python Pydantic>

Generate classes and types with C<-E -o Models.py>).

=back

=head1 AUTHORS

Fabien Coelho (Mines Paris - PSL) and Claire Yannou-Medrala (MESR).


=head1 COPYRIGHT

This software is dedicated to the public domain.

=head1 SEE ALSO

=over 4

=item L<JSON Model Web Site|https://json-model.org/>

Including
L<JSON Model Tutorial|https://json-model.org/#/TUTO>,
L<JSON Model HOWTO|https://json-model.org/#/HOWTO>,
L<JSON Model Specification|https://json-model.org/#/SPEC>, and
L<JSON Model illustrative models|https://json-model.org/#/MODELS>.

=item L<JSON Model Sources|https://github.com/clairey-zx81/json-model>

Source code on GitHub.

=item L<JSON Model Issues|https://github.com/clairey-zx81/json-model/issues>

Report bugs on GitHub.

=back

=cut
